# CS 101

A **computer** is a piece of tape that holds ones and zeros along with a device that can read and write to it and it's called a **Turing Machine** and in theory, it can compute anything.

At the core of modern computers, we have the **Central Processing Unit (CPU)** if we crack it open, we find a piece of silicon with billions of small **transistors** which are like microscopic on-off switches. The value of one of these switches is called a **bit** and it is the smallest bit of information a computer can use. 1 bit by itself is not so useful so they come in a pack of 8 called a **byte**. 1 byte can represent 256 different values like all the characters on the keyboard. When you type in your keyboard, the character is mapped to a binary value in a character encoding like **ASCII** or **UTF-8**.

Binary is just a system for counting like base 10. It only has two characters 1 and 0. Humans have a hard time reading binary so they use the **hexadecimal**-base 16 values where 10 numbers and 6 letters can represent a 4 bit group called a **nibble**.

As a developer, when you write code, it will eventually be converted to machine code which is a binary format which can be decoded and executed by the CPU. The CPU doesn't store data for your applications. For storing data computers have **Random Access Memory (RAM)**. The RAM is like a neighbourhood and inside of every house lives a byte, each house is a memory location and this memory location has a **memory address** e.g. `0XFD` which the CPU can read and write to. You can think of the CPU and RAM as the brain of the computer but for a computer to be useful, it needs to hanle **Input and Output**, **I/O**

Input could be the keyboard, output could be the monitor. Most users don't have to worry about how the computer fits this hardware together because we have **operating system kernels** like linux, mac and windows kernels that control all hardware resources [cpu, memory, input devices, output devices] via **device drivers**.

To start hacking on the operating system, your first entry point is the **shell**. It is a program that exposes the operating system to the end user. It is called a shell because it wraps the kernel. It takes a line of text as input and produces an output. This is called a **command line interface (CLI)**. Not only does it connect to your own computer, but with the Secure Shell Protocol (SSH), it can also connect to remote computers over a network.

Now that you have access to the **mainframe**, bulk data processing computer, it's time to pick a programming language.

A **programming language** is a tool that uses the **abstraction principle** to make computers practical to work with for humans by simplifying different systems layer by layer. Some languages like Python are **interpreted** that means there's a program called an **interpreter** that will execute each line of code line by line. Other languages like C++ are **compiled**. They use a compiler to convert the entire program into machine code in advance before the CPU attempts to execute it. This results in an executable file which can be run by the operating system without any extra dependencies. Every programming language has a variety of **data-types**.

The most fundamental way to use data in your programming language is by declaring a **variables** which attaches a name to a datapoint allowing to use it somewhere else in your code. Python is a dynamically typed language which means we don't need to tell the program exactly what data type is assigned to a varibale.

Languages like C are statically typed

```c
char hello[] = "This is good"
int num = 3
```

When you define a variable, its value is stored somewhere in memory on the hardware and you may need to allocate and free up memory throughout the program. A **pointer** is a variable whose value is the memory address of another variable which can be used for low level memory control. Memory manage is quite a hassle and programming languages don't want to deal with it so they implement a **garbage collector** which automatically allocates and deallocates memory when an object is no longer in use or no longer referenced.

```c
int *numPointer

numPointer = &num;
```

Data types are different in every programming language but typically you'll find

- int: for whole numbers signed (-23) or unsigned(23)
- float or floating point: for decimal numbers. It is called a float because there is only enough memory to represent a certain range of numbers at a certain pricision. It is basically a form scientific notation to make computers faster
- Double: This is offered in many languages if you need more precision range that doubles the amount of memeory used for a number
- char: This represents a single character
- string: This is used for represent multiple characters together

These characters need to be stored in a certain order which could be

- Big Endian
- Little Endian

In software engineering, we organise data into data structures.

One of the most useful data structures is the array or list

- linked lists: This has a pointer to the next
- Stack: LIFO principle: like a stack of plates
- Queue: FIFO: Like a queue
- Hash aka map or dictionary

Sometimes it is not efficient to order data in a linear way. Therefore, we can have

- Trees

This can be too rigid of a data structure so we can use

- Graphs: These have nodes and edges which defines a relationship between the nodes

Data structures don't do anything on their own. You'll need an algorithm (al gore rythm) which is just code that solves a problem. There are several mechanisms for implementing algorithms. The fundamental of which is a **function**. It is a block of code that takes in an input, does an operation and returns a value.

Just like variables, functions have names and can be called with different input parameters called **arguments**.

In a function, you might compare values using **operators** specific to programming languages.

**True, False** values are called **Boolean** values.

Define Expressions.

Your code will run a line of code (called a **statement**) e.g. the **if statement** which handles **conditional logic**. Another statement is the loop (while loop). To loop over an **iterable**, you'lluse the for statement

If a function doesn't have an output, that function is called a **void function**.

Functions can call themselves. When they do, it is called recursion.

When you call a function, it will be put into a **call stack**. When a function keeps calling itself, the language keeps pushing frames of the function into the call stack and when it overflows the stack, we will have an **stack overflow** error. To avoid this, your algorithm needs a base condition so it knows when to terminate the loop.

When you write an algorithm, you'll need to know whether it is good code or not. The system for doing it is big-0 notation. It is a standard format for approximating the performance of an algorithm at scale. It may reference time-complexity and space-complexity: how much memory is used up.

Developers have many algorithm types at their disposal

- Brute Force: Loop over every possible combination to hack something
- Divide and Conquer: Like Binary search, where you keep cutting it in half until you find what you are looking for
- Dynamic Programming: Here a problem is broken down into smaller problems. The result of each computation is stored for use using a technique called **memoization.** If the function has already been called, it will use the existing value instead of calling the function again.
- Greedy programming: This makes the choice that is most beneficial without considering the problem as a whole.
  - An example is Dijkstra's Shortest Path
- Back tracking algorithms

There are many ways to get things done. This is the same is coding. So there are different paradigms that can be used

- Declarative: This describes what the program does and the outcome without caring about the control flow. This style is associated with functional programming languages like haskell.
- Imperative: The code uses statements, controls the flow and describes instructions for how to produce a particular output. It is associated with procedural languages like C
- These days most programming languages are multi-paradigm.
- OOP: Using classes which use properties and methods. This opens the door to other ideas called design patterns.
  - Classes are used to instantiate objects

If data is long lived, it stays in the heap and not the call stack.

The CPU has threads. A thread takes the physical CPU core and breaks it into virtual cores which allow for the running of code simultaneously. Some programming languages support parallelism where you write code that executes on two different threads at the same time. Many languages are single threaded but that doesn't mean they can't do two things at the same. Instead they implement concurrency models like event loops or code routines that can pause or delay the normal execution of code to handle multiple jobs on a single thread at the same time. Concurrency means multiple computations are happening at the same time.

In modern computing we rarely work with the bare metal cpu instead we work in the cloud with virtual machines. It is a software that simulates hardware that allows us to take really big computers and split them up into a bunch of smaller virtual computers.
